IOSR Journal of Electronics and Communication Engineering (IOSR-JECE)  
e-ISSN: 2278-2834,p- ISSN: 2278-8735.Volume 10, Issue 3, Ver. II (May - Jun.2015), PP 32-36 
www.iosrjournals.org    
DOI: 10.9790/2834-10323236                                         www.iosrjournals.org                                         32 | Page 
 
Smart Irrigation System 
 
S. Darshna1, T.Sangavi2 , Sheena Mohan3, A.Soundharya4, Sukanya Desikan4 
Department of Electronics and Communication, Amrita School of Engineering, India
 
Abstract: With the water requirements in irrigation being large, there is a need for a smart irrigation system 
that can save about 80% of the water. This prototype aims at saving time and avoiding problems like constant 
vigilance. It also helps in water conservation by automatically providing water to the plants/gardens depending 
on their water requirements. It can also prove to be efficient in Agricultural fields, Lawns & Parks. As 
technology is advancing, there is always a chance of reducing risks and making work simpler. Embedded and 
micro controller systems provide solutions for many problems. This application precisely controls water system 
for gardens by using a sensor micro controller system. It is achieved by installing sensors in the field to monitor 
the soil temperature and soil moisture which transmits the data to the microcontroller for estimation of water 
demands of plants.  
Keywords: Soil Moisture, Temperature, Moisture Sensor, Resistance Temperature Detector (RTD), Relay, 
Microcontroller. 
 
I.  
 Introduction 
In the present era one of the greatest problems faced by the world is water scarcity and agriculture 
being a demanding occupation consumes plenty of water. Therefore a system is required that uses water 
judiciously. Smart irrigation systems estimate and measure diminution of existing plant moisture in order to 
operate an irrigation system, restoring water as needed while minimizing excess water use.  
The soil moisture based irrigation control [1] uses Tensiometric and Volumetric techniques, which are 
relatively simple but these quantities are related through a soil water characteristic curve that is specific to a soil 
type. Also the sensors used require routine maintenance for proper performance. Intelligent automatic plant 
irrigation system [2] concentrates watering plants regularly without human monitoring using a moisture sensor. 
The circuit is build around a comparator Op-amp (LM324) and a timer which drives a relay to switch on a 
motor.The system uses a hardware component, which is subjected to variation with the environmental 
conditions.  
A real-time wireless smart sensor array for scheduling irrigation[3] prototyped a real-time, smart sensor array 
for measuring soil moisture and soil temperature that uses off-the-shelf components  was  developed and 
evaluated for scheduling irrigation in cotton.  
This system is specific for a crop and hence its usage is limited.Proper scheduling of irrigation is 
critical for efficient water management in crop production, particularly under conditions of water scarcity. The 
effects of the applied amount of irrigation water, irrigation frequency and water use are particularly important. 
To improve water efficiency there must be a proper irrigation scheduling strategy. So our project devices a 
simple system, using a microcontroller to automate the irrigation and watering of small potted plants or crops 
with minimal manual interventions. 
 
II. 
 Why Need This Ststem 
Until quite recently, India enjoyed abundant water resources. But population growth and 
overexploitation has led to a situation where the demand for water is exceeding supply. 
 
Fig1: The graph shows exponential decrease of water per capita. 
Smart Irrigation System 
DOI: 10.9790/2834-10323236                                         www.iosrjournals.org                                         33 | Page 
From the graph we currently notice that the water availability is in stress. If this rate continues, then we 
would face severe water scarcity. So there is an urgent need to conserve water. During manual irrigation, the 
water requirement of plants/crops is not monitored. Even when the soil is moist enough, water is still provided. 
This water is not absorbed by the plants and thus is wasted. Hence a system is to monitor the water requirements 
of the plant is needed. Also Smart Irrigation System installation means decreased operating expense by 
maintenance personnel. 
 
III. 
 Syetem Overview 
This prototype monitors the amount of soil moisture and temperature. A predefined range of soil 
moisture and temperature is set, and can be varied with soil type or crop type. In case the moisture or 
temperature of the soil deviates from the specified range, the watering system is turned on/off. In case of dry soil 
and high soil temperature, it will activate the irrigation system, pumping water for watering the plants.  
The block diagram of smart irrigation system is represented in Fig1. It consists of a microcontroller 
(ATmega328) which is the brain of the system. Both the moisture and temperature sensors are connected to the 
input pins of the controller. The water pump and the servo motor are coupled with the output pins. If the sensors 
depart from the predefined range, the controller turns on the pump. The servo motor is used to control the 
angular position of the pipe, which ensures equal distribution of water to the soil. An LED indicator indicates 
the status of the pump. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig2: block diagram of smart irrigation system 
 
This system can be implemented on a large scale for farming purposes, which can further prove to be more 
advantageous. Owing to prevailing conditions and water shortages, the optimum irrigation schedules should be 
determined especially in farms to conserve water. 
 
IV. 
 Project Description 
 Hardware Components: 
1)   Soil Moisture Sensor- soil moisture sensors estimates the soil volumetric water content based on the 
dielectric constant (soil bulk permittivity) of the soil. The dielectric constant can be thought of as the soil's 
ability to transmit electricity. The dielectric constant of soil increases as the water content of the soil increases. 
This response is due to the fact that the dielectric constant of water is much larger than the other soil 
components, including air. Thus, measurement of the dielectric constant gives a predictable estimation of water 
content. It consists of a pair of electrodes to measure the resistance of the soil. Greater the resistance, lower the 
moisture content of the soil. 
Smart Irrigation System 
DOI: 10.9790/2834-10323236                                         www.iosrjournals.org                                         34 | Page 
 
Fig3: Moisture sensor connected to the input pin of the microcontroller 
 
2)  Temperature Sensor- A Resistance Temperature Detector(RTD) is used to measure temperature as a function 
of resistance. As the temperature of the soil increases, the resistance of the soil also increases. RTDs readings 
are more accurate and more repeatable. 
 
 
Fig4: RTD connected to the input of the microcontroller 
 
3)  Relay- it is used to switch on/off the pump according to the watering requirement of the soil. 
 
Fig5: interfacing Arduino with pump and relay 
 
 
 
 
Smart Irrigation System 
DOI: 10.9790/2834-10323236                                         www.iosrjournals.org                                         35 | Page 
4) Servo Motor and Rotating Platform- to take the water pipe to water the target plot. In order to control the 
spray distance and angle, we use a servo motor. 
 
 
Fig6: Sevo motor  connected to the Arduino Board 
 
Hardware Design: 
In our model, we are demonstrating watering of only one pot, so a single moisture sensor and 
temperature sensor is used. Depending on the number of pots, the number of moisture sensor and temperature 
sensor to be interfaced with the board will vary. When the soil moisture sensor is interfaced with the board , the 
sensor reports values of resistances of the soil in which it is immersed into. As soil moisture sensor is analog, an 
inbuilt ADC in Arduino is used to convert into its digital form (0-1023), which represents resistance. Dry soil 
will have the maximum resistance and wet soil will have least resistance. Similarly, The temperature sensor 
(RTD) reports values of temperature in terms of resistance. If the temperature of the soil is high, then the sensor 
reports high value of resistance and vice versa. The servo motor is programmed to rotate from 0 to 180 degree. 
It is a 3.3V motor and does not require any driver. The rotating platform is attached on the motor to provide a 
base for the movement of the pipe. If the soil is dry, temperature sensor and moisture sensor values will be high, 
so the pump is turned on using a relay and switched off when the values reach a threshold .The vice versa is 
applicable for moist soil. 
 
Software Design: 
The software used in our project is Arduino. It provides a number of libraries to make programming 
simple. In our prototype, the controller AtMega328 is programmed in Arduino. The program in Arduino 
designates a preset range of resistance value in digital format (ranging from 0 to 1023) for both the moisture and 
the temperature sensor. Any aberration from the set range switches on/off the pump, to water the plants.  
 
V.  
Advantages Of The System 
This technology is recommended for efficient automated irrigation systems and it may provide a 
valuable tool for conserving water planning and irrigation scheduling which is extendable to other similar 
agricultural crops. Maximum absorption of the water by the plant is ensured by spreading the water uniformly 
using a servo motor. So there is minimal wastage of water. This system also allows controlling the amount of 
water delivered to the plants when it is needed based on types of plants by monitoring soil moisture and 
temperature.This project can be used in large agricultural area where human effort needs to be minimized. Many 
aspects of the system can be customized and fine tuned through software for a plant requirement. 
 
VI. 
 Result 
The smart irrigation system was tested on a garden plant. The plant’s water requirement is 600-800mm 
a day and temperature requirement of the soil ranges from 50oC- 100oC. In the Arduino code, the moisture and 
temperature range were set as 300-700 and 450-800  respectively (which delineates the corresponding resistance 
value in digital format). Moreover this system proves to be cost effective and proficient in conserving water and 
reducing its wastage. 
 
VII.  
Conclusion 
In the present era, the farmers use irrigation technique through the manual control, in which the farmers 
irrigate the land at regular intervals [5].This process seems to consume more water and results in water wastage. 
Smart Irrigation System 
DOI: 10.9790/2834-10323236                                         www.iosrjournals.org                                         36 | Page 
Moreover in dry areas where there is inadequate rainfall, irrigation becomes difficult. Hence we require an 
automatic system that will precisely monitor and control the water requirements in the field. Installing Smart 
irrigation system saves time and ensures judicious usage of water. Moreover this architecture uses 
microcontroller which promises an increase in system life by reducing power consumption. 
 
VIII.  Future Scope 
Our project can be improvised by adding a Webscaper which can predict the weather and water the 
plants/crops accordingly. If rain is forecasted, less water is let out for the plants. Also, a GSM module can be 
included so that the user can control the system via smart phone. A water meter can be installed to estimate the 
amount of water used for irrigation and thus giving a cost estimation. A solenoid valve can be used for varying 
the volume of water flow. Furthermore, Wireless sensors can also be used. 
Acknowledgement 
We would like to extend our sincere thanks to all those who played a role in the completion of this 
project. Firstly, we are highly indebted to Amrita School of Engineering, Coimbatore for their constant 
supervision and support. We would also like to thank Mrs. Souparnika for her guidance, and encouragement 
throughout the project work. Lastly, we are immensely grateful to all those  involved in this project as without 
their inspiration and valuable suggestion it would not have been possible to develop the project within the 
prescribed time period. 
 
References 
[1]  
Rafael Muñoz-Carpena and Michael D. Dukes,  Automatic Irrigation Based on Soil Moisture for Vegetable Crops,  IFAS Extension, 
2005. 
[2]  
K.N.Manjula    B.Swathi    and    D.Sree    Sandhya , Intelligent Automatic Plant Irrigation System. 
 [3]  
G. Vellidis , M. Tucker, C. Perry, C. Kvien, C. Bednarz, “A Real-Time Wireless Smart Sensor Array for Scheduling Irrigation”, 
National Environmentally Sound Production Agriculture Laboratory (NESPAL), 2007. 
[4] 
Constantinos Marios Angelopoulos, Sotiris Nikoletseas , Georgios Constantinos Theofanopoulos, A Smart System for Garden 
Watering using Wireless Sensor Networks, MobiWac ,October 31–November 4, 2011. 
[5]  
R.suresh, S.Gopinath, K.Govindaraju, T.Devika, N.Suthanthira Vanitha, GSM based Automated Irrigation Control using Raingun 
Irrigation System, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering ,Vol. 3, Issue 2, 
February 2014. 
 
